.TH ELDA 1 "May 2026" "Elda 0.1.49-Sumomo" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
elda \- Unix-first package manager with native, git, binary, interbuild, and migration workflows
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B elda
.RI [ global-options ]
.I command
.RI [ command-options ]
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B elda
is a Linux-first package manager built around explicit package metadata, signed
remotes, staged payloads, recorded file ownership, verification, and recoverable
transactions.
.PP
Elda treats maintained recipes, direct git installs, vendor binaries, dynamic
foreign source remotes, local profiles, and adopted packages as one package
manager domain.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-V ", " --version
Print detailed release, build, component, and schema version information.
.TP
.B --json
Emit structured machine-readable output when supported.
.TP
.B --dry-run
Preview a mutating command without applying it.
.TP
.B --no-stream
Suppress live progress events and print only the final report.
.TP
.B -S
Request live host system mode for this invocation.
.TP
.B --offline
Use only local payload/cache/snapshot data and fail if required data is missing.
.TP
.B --log-level " 0|1|2|3
Override per-run session log verbosity for mutating commands.
.TP
.B --accept-rotated-key " REMOTE
Accept one signed TOFU key rotation for the named remote.
.SH PACKAGE LIFECYCLE
.TP
.B elda i PACKAGE...
Install packages with normal lane selection.
.TP
.B elda ig PACKAGE...
Install packages through the source lane.
.TP
.B elda ib PACKAGE...
Install packages through the binary lane.
.TP
.B elda rm PACKAGE...
Remove packages. Use \fB--cascade\fR only when reverse dependencies should also be removed.
.TP
.B elda u [PACKAGE...]
Upgrade the world or named packages from synced metadata.
.TP
.B elda sync [REMOTE...]
Refresh all enabled remotes or only the named remotes.
.TP
.B elda search QUERY
Search synced package metadata.
.TP
.B elda init
Create Elda config and data directories on a new root.
.SH INSPECTION
.TP
.B elda ls
List installed packages. Filters include \fB--explicit\fR, \fB--deps\fR, \fB--held\fR,
\fB--pinned\fR, and \fB--source-kind\fR.
.TP
.B elda info PACKAGE
Show package identity, source, dependency, provider, file, and system metadata.
.TP
.B elda files PACKAGE
List owned files.
.TP
.B elda files owner PATH
Show the package that owns a managed path.
.TP
.B elda files search QUERY
Search installed managed paths.
.TP
.B elda why PACKAGE
Explain why a package is installed.
.TP
.B elda rdeps PACKAGE
Show reverse dependencies.
.TP
.B elda diff PACKAGE
Compare installed files to the manifest; \fB--candidate\fR compares the next upgrade.
.SH REMOTES AND CACHES
.TP
.B elda rmt add NAME=URL [--trust MODE] [--packages-url URL] [--channel CHANNEL]
Register a native remote or dynamic interemote.
.TP
.B elda rmt preview NAME
Preview a dynamic interemote catalog before syncing it.
.TP
.B elda rmt ls
List configured remotes.
.TP
.B elda rmt info NAME
Show configured and synced remote state.
.TP
.B elda rmt trust NAME
Show configured trust policy and persisted verification state.
.TP
.B elda rmt rm NAME
Remove a remote document.
.TP
.B elda cache add NAME=URL [--priority N]
Register a content-addressed payload cache.
.TP
.B elda cache ls
List configured cache nodes and policy.
.SH HEALTH AND RECOVERY
.TP
.B elda doctor
Check bootstrap paths, remotes, backend health, advisories, and release-readiness.
.TP
.B elda check
Aggregated health: orphans, trust, triggers, adoption warnings.
.TP
.B elda verify [PACKAGE...]
Verify installed files against manifests.
.TP
.B elda recover
Recover interrupted transactions.
.TP
.B elda rollback [STATE]
Reactivate an archived state when the backend supports it.
.TP
.B elda fix-triggers
Reconcile pending system trigger work.
.SH RECIPES AND METADATA
.TP
.B elda a URL_OR_PATH
Generate or import local package metadata without installing.
.TP
.B elda rc add VALUE [--kind KIND] [--replace]
Add or import local recipe metadata.
.TP
.B elda rc check [PACKAGE]
Validate local recipes.
.TP
.B elda rc ls
List local recipes and synced catalog names.
.TP
.B elda rc show PACKAGE
Show local recipe metadata.
.TP
.B elda rc diff PACKAGE
Compare local and synced recipe metadata.
.TP
.B elda rc publish-ready PACKAGE
Report blockers before publishing a recipe.
.TP
.B elda rc rm PACKAGE
Remove a local recipe tree when the package is not installed.
.PP
Generated or imported local metadata preserves existing files unless
.B --replace
is explicit.
.SH REVIEW MEMORY
.TP
.B elda review ls
List recorded source-definition review stamps.
.TP
.B elda review info PACKAGE
Show review stamps for one package.
.TP
.B elda review diff PACKAGE
Compare reviewed recipe content in a pager.
.TP
.B elda review forget PACKAGE
Forget a recorded review stamp.
.SH GIT AND RELEASES
.TP
.B elda git tags REPO [--with-releases]
List git tags with normalized Elda version candidates.
.TP
.B elda git releases TARGET [--tag TAG]
Inspect forge release assets and host compatibility.
.TP
.B elda versions REPO
Alias for git tag version inspection.
.SH VENDOR AND APPIMAGE
.TP
.B elda vendor add NAME SOURCE [--binary BIN] [--asset ASSET] [--replace]
Create a local vendor binary recipe.
.TP
.B elda vendor import PATH [--replace]
Import vendor lock or manifest metadata.
.TP
.B elda vendor export PATH [PACKAGE...]
Export vendor recipe metadata.
.TP
.B elda appimage inspect PATH
Inspect AppImage desktop/icon/metainfo integration data.
.SH POLICY
.TP
.B elda downgrade PACKAGE [VERSION]
Install an older archived/cached package version.
.TP
.B elda pin PACKAGE VERSION
Pin a package to an exact version.
.TP
.B elda unpin PACKAGE
Clear a version pin.
.TP
.B elda hold PACKAGE
Hold a package against upgrade.
.TP
.B elda unhold PACKAGE
Clear an upgrade hold.
.TP
.B elda autoremove
Remove orphan dependency packages.
.TP
.B elda fl check [PACKAGE] [--use=+a,-b]
Inspect resolved feature flags and variant identity.
.TP
.B elda fl diff [PACKAGE] [--use=+a,-b]
Show flag drift against installed variant state.
.SH CONFFILES
.TP
.B elda config pending
List pending conffile resolution queue entries.
.TP
.B elda config diff PATH
Show conffile drift for a managed path.
.TP
.B elda config apply PATH
Accept the package version of a conffile.
.TP
.B elda config keep PATH
Keep the operator-modified conffile.
.SH TRIGGERS
.TP
.B elda trigger ls
List system trigger state.
.TP
.B elda trigger info NAME
Show one trigger record.
.SH PROFILES AND STATE
.TP
.B elda pf apply PROFILE...
Apply machine profile anchors.
.TP
.B elda pf show
Show current profile and machine-shape state.
.TP
.B elda state show
Show desired machine state summary.
.TP
.B elda state export
Export desired machine state.
.TP
.B elda state import PATH
Replay desired machine state through normal install paths.
.SH MIGRATION
.TP
.B elda adopt --from PM PACKAGE
Import one foreign package manager entry into Elda state metadata.
.TP
.B elda mg from PM
Import whole-system installed metadata from pacman, apt, apk, xbps, or portage.
.SH MAINTAINER HOSTING
.TP
.B elda host scan-tree PATH
Parse and report publish-readiness for a recipe tree.
.TP
.B elda host test-tree PATH
Validate a recipe tree (dry-run by default; \fB--install\fR for disposable-root smoke).
.TP
.B elda host doctor [--profile NAME]
Check maintainer host profile paths and signing settings.
.TP
.B elda host client-bundle [PROFILE]
Emit client remote registration snippets.
.TP
.B elda publish plan PATH [--channel CHANNEL]
Plan index publication for a recipe tree.
.TP
.B elda publish run PATH [--channel CHANNEL]
Build payloads and write channel-local index artifacts.
.TP
.B elda publish finalize [--channel CHANNEL]
Rewrite production asset URLs after upload.
.PP
Maintainer profiles live under \fI/etc/elda/host.d/*.toml\fR. See
\fBeldaforgehosting/\fR in the source repository.
.SH CI, FORGE, AND EXTENSIONS
.TP
.B elda ci sub URL
Submit a package to the local CI workspace.
.TP
.B elda ci run URL
Run CI processing locally.
.TP
.B elda forge search QUERY
Search forge metadata.
.PP
Hosted review configuration supports \fBauth = "token"\fR, \fB"bearer"\fR,
\fB"ssh"\fR, or \fB"none"\fR. Bearer mode sends an
\fBAuthorization: Bearer ...\fR header.
.TP
.B elda ext ls
List registered extensions from \fIextensions.d\fR.
.TP
.B elda daemon status
Report background refresh service state.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Elda reads:
.PP
.nf
/etc/elda/config.toml
/etc/elda/remotes.d/*.toml
/etc/elda/caches.d/*.toml
/etc/elda/extensions.d/*.toml
/etc/elda/host.d/*.toml
/etc/elda/recipes/<pkgname>/pkg.lua
.fi
.PP
Repository samples:
.PP
.RS
\fBconfig.toml\fR — copyable host default;
\fBsu/config.toml\fR — \fBsu\fR privilege provider example;
\fBexamples/config/\fR — annotated reference;
\fBfixtures/config/\fR — lean test inputs.
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/elda/config.toml
Global Elda configuration. The \fB[trust].release_keys\fR list holds trusted
release-asset signing keys; declared release signature sidecars fail closed
when the needed key is missing unless an interactive operator imports it.
.TP
.I /etc/elda/remotes.d/*.toml
Remote and interemote documents.
.TP
.I /etc/elda/caches.d/*.toml
Payload cache documents.
.TP
.I /etc/elda/extensions.d/*.toml
Extension capability registrations.
.TP
.I /etc/elda/host.d/*.toml
Maintainer publish and upload profiles.
.TP
.I /etc/elda/recipes/
Local recipe trees.
.TP
.I /var/lib/elda/db/elda.sqlite
Installed-state database.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
elda -V
elda rmt add yoka-main=https://github.com/Mjoyufull/Elda/releases/download/index/index-v1.json.zst \\
  --trust pinned \\
  --trusted-key ed25519:0011223344556677889900112233445566778899aabbccddeeff0011223344 \\
  --packages-url https://github.com/Mjoyufull/Elda.git
elda sync
elda i fsel --dry-run
elda i fsel
elda doctor
elda a https://github.com/Mjoyufull/fsel
elda rmt add heather-overlay=https://github.com/heather7283/heather7283-overlay --exclude firefox vlc
elda rmt preview heather-overlay
.fi
.SH AUTHORS
Elda is developed by Rikona, GitHub user Mjoyufull.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1)
.PP
Project documentation: README.md, USAGE.md, SPEC.md, phase.md, checklist.md,
config.toml, examples/, fixtures/, su/config.toml, and eldaforgehosting/ in the source repository.
